\section{24.12.01}

Using Monaco will be more difficult that I first imagined. And by that, I mean
I can't simply wrap a trivial plugin around the library, and then use it. There
are some extra functionality/configurations that are needed, which I do not
know. Hopefully I'll figure this out, but I'll postpone this work until later,
since I'd rather not mess around with that this year. But I probably will. I
should create extensive documentation on the core IDE functionality, so that I
have something to write about, and to see if I have thought of everything.
Having to explain everything, will make it easier to see if I have made the
right decision, or just a decision.

I think today, I'll quickly look at turning the IDE into a server


\section{24.12.07}

I've almost turned the IDE into a server, got some CORS-issues, which as usual
is the bane of my existence. Fixing it should be easy, but I don't think I will
prioritize it in the coming days. I learned that after I am done with my
education at UIB, they will delete my account, and therefore my repository. So
I think as part of my redo/fix my CI/CD-job, I'll also look into migrating from
GitLab to GitHub. Once that has been completed, I need to plan the IDE-Plugins
I am going to make, I need a plan, not only to make the development easier, but
also so, in case I do not have anything substantial to showcase, I can instead
say, oh this? This is just a prototype of my awesome plan.


\section{24.12.11}

For the rest of the week, I need to figure out what features my IDE-Plugin
-Ecosystem are going to offer. The idea behind IDE-Plugin-Ecosystem, are the
plugins needed to turn the application into an IDE. I would like for the
majority of these plugins to be pure, but we'll see what happens.

There is a lot of functionality that is missing on the Rust side, that exist on
the JSPS side. This is mostly due to the lack of plugin development happening in
Rust, and will probably not catch up. This is because debugging JSP is easier
than Rust Plugins, since I can just add a console.log in the Plugin, and then
restart the application. If I were to do something similar in Rust, I would
have to re-compile the plugin, move it to the plugin folder, and then restart
the application. I think the only place the Rust Plugin Experience could ever
excel, is the writing of Models/Html, by utilizing macros. But developing such
macros would take more time than I am currently willing to invest.


\section{24.12.13}

I need to figure out what unique features Magnolia has, and by unique, I mean
concepts that are not supported under the LSP-specification. I know some stuff,
like renaming, but I do not have a concrete grasp on what is needed to enhance
the developer experience. But I do have some ideas about general features for
enhancing the developer experience.
