\section{25.03.02}

Wasted the whole day, trying to build the rust code using flakes. Did not get it
to work, and noticed I don't get any LSP help, probably due to linking issues. I
think the best solution is to distro-jump to Debian, which \textit{just works},
and add Nix as a package which I could use for development. Getting stuff to
work in on NixOs is hard, probably in some part due to me not reading the
documentation that well. Or being able to find the documentation.
Regardless, there is some restructuring in the code that is ahead of me, I need
to be finished with the implementation stuff in two weeks, at the end of April
at the latest.

I think I'll just write some stuff, and hope it works, code-wise, until I get a
proper environment setup.

\section{25.03.03}

Got stuff to work, back on Debian again. I think I should just rewrite the base
to use \textit{regular} Rust stuff, so none of the ABI stuff. This will simplify
the code, while still allowing me to keep the stuff I've written about, since I
can talk about \textit{it would be cool if \dots}, instead of having to actually
implement the cool stuff.

\section{25.03.04}

I have discussed this before, I think, but how should the frontend and backend
communicate? I am leaning towards a frontend \to backend communication method,
so the frontend does the rendering, and event \to event mapping, but the backend
does all the state management. But will look into it.

I've done some refactoring, again. I have Rust Traits now, which I've used to
create an API for my modules, which other foreign languages can implement. I
will have to send UI modifications to the frontend, but I could coalesce them
all in the backend, by finding UI modifications that "just" result in the
identity.

Doing the modification/instruction thing is difficult, at least the way I want
to implement it. I wanted it to be some kind of DSL, so that I could analyze it.
But this is proving difficult. I think it is because I am over-engineering it,
so instead of having "add node to node", or something like that, I am supplying
a function which does the modification. It is probably better if I transpile the
DSL to the function, after I've done some analysis on it, to remove redundant or
invalid instructions.
