\chapter{Introduction}

Standard \gls{ide}s are indispensable tools in modern software development,
offering features like early bug reporting, project outline visualization, code
highlighting, and code completion, however, these \gls{ide}s may not adequately
support the unique demands of experimental programming languages. Experimental
languages could introduce new concepts like \gls{asr} Transformation, Term
Algebras, \gls{moa}, \gls{stf}, or other novel programming features. These are
concepts from the academic community, and are not common in \textit{mainstream}
languages, and as such, have little to no support in modern \gls{ide}s. To solve
this, researchers need ad hoc solutions for existing \gls{ide}s, adding the
needed functionality to test out their language features. If this ad hoc
solution is too extreme; outside of the standard functionality supported by the
developers of the application, then the solution might be short lived. As the
\gls{ide} is maintained, updated and improved, the features used to solve the
niche needs of the experimental language might be deprecated.

If, however, the \gls{ide} has integrated support for extending the standard
functionality of the application, then the ad hoc solution is more stable. Such
a system is known by many names. Plug-in architecture, exstension \gls{api}, or
plugin system, to name a few. The common factor amongst these system, is that
some component, be it a plug-in, an exstension, or a plugin, can extend the
functionality of the application. This is a modular approach to extending the
life time of an application; extending its software longevity. In many of these
systems, these components, are composable, allowing for multiple components to
work together in a modular fashion to add extra features to an application. This
is way of adding functionality to an application is commonly used in \gls{ide}s,
and can be taken to the extreme.


\section{Modular Architecture}

A modular \gls{ide} would assist in this. Even if a new feature from an
experimental language is introduced, it is unlikely that this feature has no
relation to existing features, and as such, it is easier to extend the
application in such a manner to facilitate this new feature, with help of
existing modules. If, however it is the case that this feature is
paradigm-shifting, then there will still be existing functionality that can be
used, re-used or extended to facilitate this.

If an application is designed to be modular from the start, then features not
thought of, by the original developers can be integrated into the application,
and be stable. If an experimental research language introduces some paradigm
shifting concept, then this can easily tested in such a modular \gls{ide}.

\section{Zero Core Application}

Taking the modular architecture design to the extreme, the core application has
no base features, everything is enabled by an external module. We have taken to
call such a highly modular application, a \textit{zero core} application. To
qualify for a \textit{zero core} application, the default application has no
functionality; everything is aquaired by modules. Such a design facilitates a
modular approach, enabling a module-developer to only focus on the functionality
they want to extend, not the entire core.

\section{Thesis Outline}

In this paper, we will start by discussing some background around modularity,
software longevity, and Magnolia (chapter 2). We will also discuss the different
ways to achieve modularity within an application, and point out different
behaviors that arise from such a setup (chapter 4). Finally, we will discuss the
results (chapter 5), and conclusions (chapter 6).

Traditional \gls{ide}s encompass essential features such as syntax highlighting, code
navigation, and hover-help, playing a crucial role in the software development
process. However, their limitations become apparent when working with
experimental languages. This paper advocates for modularization and
\textit{composability} as key design principles, demonstrating their ability to
extend the operational lifespan of software by allowing for ease-of adoption to
new paradigms and tools. The discussion revolves around Magnolia, an
experimental research programming language developed by \gls{bldl} at the
University of Bergen. Magnolia will act as a case study illustrating the need for
a specialized \gls{ide}. It is a way to experiment with novel language features.
And to achieve this in a sufficient manner, a more specialized \gls{ide} is
required.

Designing a zero core architecture will be the focus point of this paper, to
develop and implement an modular \gls{ide}. The target language will be Magnolia,
an experimental research language being developed by \gls{bldl} at the University
of Bergen.

In section bla, we will discuss bla
